The Louisiana Territory had once been claimed by France, which then lost its claim to Spain. But in 1800, the French military and political leader
Napoleon Bonaparte secretly forced Spain to give the Louisiana Territory back to France. Napoleon hoped to restore the French empire in the Americas. By
1803, however, Napoleon had lost interest in this plan for two reasons:
« He wanted to concentrate French resources on fighting Great Britain
+ A rebellion led by Toussaint Louverture against French rule on the island of Santo Domingo had resulted in heavy French losses.
U.S. Interest in the Mississippi River During Jefferson's presidency, the western frontier extended beyond Ohio and Kentucky into the Indiana
Territory. Settlers in this region depended for their economic existence on transporting goods on rivers that flowed westward into the Mississippi and southward as far as New Orleans. They were greatly alarmed therefore when, in 1802, Spanish officials, who were still in charge of New Orleans, closed the port to Americans. They revoked the right of deposit granted in the Pinckney
Treaty of 1795, which had allowed American farmers tax-free use of the port.
People on the frontier clamored for government action. In addition to being concerned about the economic impact of the closing ofNew Orleans, President
Jefferson was troubled by its consequences on foreign policy. He feared that so long as a foreign power controlled the river at New Orleans, the United States risked entanglement in European affairs.
Negotiations Jefferson sent ministers to France with instructions to offer up to $10 million for both New Orleans and a strip of land extending from that port eastward to Florida. If the American ministers failed in their negotiations with the French, they were instructed to begin discussions with Britain for a U.S.-Britain alliance. Napoleon's ministers, seeking funds for a war against
Britain, offered to sell not only New Orleans but also the entire Louisiana
Territory for $15 million. The opportunity to purchase so much land surprised
American ministers. They quickly went beyond their instructions and accepted the French offer.
Constitutional Predicament Jefferson and most Americans strongly approved of the Louisiana Purchase. Nevertheless, a constitutional problem troubled the president. Jefferson was committed to a strict interpretation of the Constitution and rejected Hamilton's argument that certain powers were implied. No clause in the Constitution explicitly stated that a president could purchase foreign land.
In this case, Jefferson determined to set aside his idealism for the country’s good. He submitted the purchase agreement to the Senate, arguing that lands could be added to the United States as an application of the president's power to make treaties. Federalist senators criticized the treaty. However, casting aside the Federalist attacks, the Democratic-Republican majority in the Senate quickly ratified the purchase.
TOPIC 4.2 THE RISE OF POLITICAL PARTIES AND THE ERA OF JEFFERSON 167
