claims to the Oregon Territory, better relations with American Indians, and more accurate maps and land routes for fur trappers and future settlers.
Judicial Inpeachments
Jefferson tried various methods for overturning past Federalist measures and appointments. Soon after entering office, he suspended the Alien and Sedition
Acts and released those jailed under them. The Federalist appointments to the courts previously made by Washington and Adams were not subject to recall or removal except by impeachment. Federalist judges therefore continued in office, much to the annoyance of the Democratic-Republican president,
Jefferson. Hoping to remove partisan Federalist judges, Jefferson supported a campaign of impeachment. The judge of one federal district was found to be mentally unbalanced. The House voted for his impeachment, and the Senate then voted to remove him. The House also impeached a Supreme Court justice,
Samuel Chase, but the Senate acquitted him after finding no evidence of “high crimes.”
Except for these two cases, the impeachment campaign was largely a failure, as almost all the Federalist judges remained in office. Even so, the threat of impeachment caused the judges to be more cautious and less partisan in their decisions.
Jefferson's Reelection
In 1804, Jefferson won reelection by an overwhelming margin, receiving all but 14 of the 176 electoral votes. His second term was marked by growing difficulties. He faced a plot by his former vice president, Aaron Burr. The
Democratic-Republican Party split, with a faction (the “Quids”) accusing him of abandoning the partys principles. Foreign troubles came from the
Napoleonic wars in Europe.
Aaron Burr
A Democratic-Republican caucus (a closed meeting) in 1804 decided not to nominate Aaron Burr for a second term as vice president. Burr then embarked on a series of ventures, one of which threatened to break up the Union and another of which resulted in the death of Alexander Hamilton.
Federalist Conspiracy Secretly forming a political pact with some radical
New England Federalists, Burr planned to win the governorship of New York in 1804, unite that state with the New England states, and then lead this group of states to secede from the nation. Most Federalists followed Alexander
Hamilton in opposing Burr, who was defeated in the New York election. The conspiracy then disintegrated.
Duel with Hamilton Angered by an insulting remark attributed to
Hamilton, Burr challenged the Federalist leader to a duel and fatally shot him.
Hamilton's death in 1804 deprived the Federalists of their last great leader and earned Burr the enmity of many.
TOPIC 4.2 THE RISE OF POLITICAL PARTIES AND THE ERA OF JEFFERSON 169
